Allowing version independence in Siteconfig (#13)
openshift-kni/kni-enhancements: enhancements/siteconfig-extra-manifest-version-independence.md

          - myCR.yaml					
  ```

  * as a result same named CR coming from user directory doesn't take precedent, rather siteconfig issues an error complaining same named CR is not allowed.

### Goals

- Allow customer to include any custom CRs having same/different name than builtIn CRs residing in the container
- Provide a better control on how to enable and disable builtIn CRs
- Keep backward compatibility of the behavior corresponds to 4.13 version.

### Non-Goals

- TBD
### User Stories

- [EPIC LINK](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-7365) --> [User Story](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-8672)

## Proposal

* **Controllability:** The proposal is to introduce a parameter called  <span style="color:red">*extraManifests.builtinCRs*</span>. which can hold value "*include|exclude*", which provide the flexibility for the customer to include/exclude CRs that is provided via ztp-container. 

  * In this way, customer have full control of what CRs goes into the siteconfig. Until 4.13 release, customer couldn't put same named CR to the CR provided via ztp-container in the *extraManifestPath*. 

 ```yaml
  - cluster:
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:

>       builtinCRs: include | exclude   <----- New field

Reviewer: can we be more explicit instead of `builtinCRs`? `builtinCRs` implies CRs coming from currently attached site-gen conatiner's `~/ztp-container's ztp/source-crs/extra-manifest`? how about `siteGenContainerExtraManifest` ?

Author: This name seemed long!

      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - myCR.yaml					
  ```

* **Version Independence**: This change will allow customer to have version independence of extra-manifests having different versioned folder in their git repository. Customer can extract versioned extra-manifests and can push to their git repo. An example has shown below:

```yaml
siteconfig/
├── kustomization.yaml
├── version_4.12
│   ├── kustomization.yaml
│   ├── sno-extra-manifest/

> │   ├── cnfde9.yaml

Reviewer: How would the SiteConfig would look like in this case? Can we still have `extraManifestPath: mypath/`?

Reviewer: Does that mean it will partially break backwards compatibility? Advantage of having `extraManifestPath` was to allow any CRs on top whatever came in the container. with `builtinCRs` set to `exclude`...it seems like we are giving that up flexibility?

Author: New commit https://github.com/openshift-kni/kni-enhancements/commit/3dadf26972770907a83001b5feddd3236416f943 is added based on the design discussion happened in 06/09 (https://docs.google.com/document/d/1S4RVy6dRmOTuVtPngB8YM2bUp4CUED_370XZJKPgoPo/edit#). Please review @pixelsoccupied

Reviewer 2: I believe the current proposal preserves backwards compatibility and gives an opt-in ability to benefit from the search paths/version independence. In the case of a SiteConfig with only extraManifestPath, the behavior will be identical to the prior releases. If the user switches to the new (recommended) searchPath they get the new behavior.

Author: phrasing changed based on the suggestion.

└── version_4.13
    ├── kustomization.yaml
    ├── sno-extra-manifest/
    ├── cnfde10.yaml    
```

### Workflow Description

> - Due to the proposal, now we have different combination of *include|exclude* in extraManifests and the filter level. Overall 4 scenarios are briefly explained in the below table based on the proposal: 

Reviewer: Could you expand the examples a little with input CRs and output CRs? 
e.g in case 1
```
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: exclude
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - myCR.yaml					
```
We can have 2 sets:
- ztp-extra-manifests [ztpCR1.yaml, ztpCR2.yaml]
- custom-extra-manifests [myCR.yaml, myCR2.yaml]

So final output in the CM would contain: [myCR.yaml] ?

Author: Example of final output added with commit 5fbd818231476ca3ff8fcf03632ad6e9ba81110b

<table>
<tr>
<th>
Scenario
</th>
<th>
Version Independence
</th>
<th>
Logical Flow
</th>
</tr>

<tr>

<td>
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: exclude
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - myCR.yaml					
 ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
yes (changes in 4.14)
</td>

<td>
  <li>if <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is in <b>exclude</b>, Only CRs that will be included in site generation are the ones that reside under <i>extraManifestPath</i> in the git, no CR will be fetched from ztp-container</li>
  <li>if the default is <i>exclude</i>, only listed *.yaml files will be included in CR generationfrom extraManifestPath</li>
</td>

</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: exclude
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: include
        exclude:
          - myCR.yaml					
  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
yes (changes in 4.14)
</td>

<td>

>   <li>if <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is in <b>exclude</b>, Only CRs that will be included in site generation are the one that reside under <i>extraManifestPath</i> in the git, no CR will be fetched from ztp-container</li>

Reviewer: This and L148 is talking about the same thing. Could you clarify?

---
title: Allowing version independence in siteconfig
authors:
  - "@sabbir-47"
reviewers:
  - "@imiller0"
  - "@serngawy"
  - "@Iack"
  - "@serngawy" 
approvers:
  - "@imiller0"

api-approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2023-06-02
last-updated: 2023-06-02
status: provisional
---

# Cluster Group Upgrade (CGU) conditions and their reason/messages enhancement

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Documentation is updated in the upstream
- [ ] Documentation is updated in the downstream

## Summary

Siteconfig allows customer to include custom extra manifests and list them in the siteconfig CR to be added during CR generation. It provides the flexibility to add additional CRs from the customer point of view during install time along with the CRs the RAN team provides. 

> The enhancement seek to address the version independence of extra manifests, by putting version dependent manifests in version specific folder in git and pointing the directory via **extraManifestPath** and disabling the fetching builtIn RAN CRs provided from the ztp container 

Reviewer 3: seeks

    extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: exclude
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - myCR.yaml					
 ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
yes (changes in 4.14)
</td>

<td>
  <li>if <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is in <b>exclude</b>, Only CRs that will be included in site generation are the ones that reside under <i>extraManifestPath</i> in the git, no CR will be fetched from ztp-container</li>
  <li>if the default is <i>exclude</i>, only listed *.yaml files will be included in CR generationfrom extraManifestPath</li>
</td>

</tr>

<tr>
<td>
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: exclude
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: include
        exclude:
          - myCR.yaml					
  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
yes (changes in 4.14)
</td>

<td>
  <li>if <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is in <b>exclude</b>, Only CRs that will be included in site generation are the one that reside under <i>extraManifestPath</i> in the git, no CR will be fetched from ztp-container</li>
 <li>if the default is <i>include</i>, only listed *.yaml files will be excluded in CR generation from extraManifestPath</li>
</td>

</tr>

> </tr>

Reviewer 3: not needed

<tr>
<td>
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: include
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: include
        exclude:
          - myCR.yaml					
  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
No (Same as release 4.13)
</td>

<td>
<li> Current behavior is explained <a href="https://github.com/openshift-kni/cnf-features-deploy/blob/master/ztp/gitops-subscriptions/argocd/ExtraManifestsFilter.md">in the doc</a></li>

 <li>When <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is in <b>include</b>, all the CRs resides under <i>extraManifestPath</i> and in the ztp-container will be allowed to be added in the interim list of CRs</li>
 <li> Then in the filter if the default is include, the interim list will be updated with the exclude list of CRs, which will be discarded from the final list</li>
 <li>Customer is not allowed to put same named CR in the extraManifestPath to the RAN CRs coming from ztp-container</li>
</td>

</tr>

> </tr>

Reviewer 3: not needed

 <li>Customer is not allowed to put same named CR in the extraManifestPath to the RAN CRs coming from ztp-container</li>

</td>

</tr>
</tr>

</table>
         
 
* The proposed way for customer to include all the CRs from manifest path and none from ztp-container will be:

   ```yaml
  - cluster:
     extraManifestPath: mypath/
     extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: exclude
  ```

    
* The better way for customer to exclude all the CRs both from ztp-container and manifest path is to just use inclusionDefault like below:

   ```yaml
  - cluster:
     extraManifests:
       filter:
         inclusionDefault: exclude
  ``` 

### Risks and Mitigations

N/A

## Implementation choices

N/A

### API Extensions

New parameter will be introduced named <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> which will hold value **include|exclude**

### Test Cases
- When <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is **exclude**, only CRs that will be included or excluded are from the extraManifestPath directory.

- When <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is **exclude**, same named CR in extraManifestPath to ztp-container is allowed.

> - Ensure backward compatibitlity, if <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is not defined, the behavior must corresponds to the last release(4.13)

Reviewer 3: correspond

> - Ensure backward compatibitlity, if <span style="color:red">builtinCRs</span> is not defined, the behavior must corresponds to the last release(4.13)

Reviewer 3: compatibility

## Motivation

* Currently customer can put custom manifests in the git repo and point them via **extraManifestPath**. 
* If they only want to include custom CRs to build site specific CRs, **inclusionDefault** must be set to *exclude*, and pass the list of file names under **filter.include**, but it does not allow to have the [same CR name](https://github.com/openshift-kni/cnf-features-deploy/blob/master/ztp/siteconfig-generator/siteConfig/siteConfigBuilder.go#L462-L464) for the custom CRs. 

To be able to add custom CRs, customer needs to change the name of the custom CR.

  ```yaml
  - cluster:
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - myCR.yaml					
  ```

### Goals

- Allow customer to include any custom CRs having same/different name than builtIn CRs residing in the container
- Provide a better control on how to enable and disable builtIn CRs
- Keep backward compatibility of the behavior corresponds to 4.13 version.

### Non-Goals

- TBD

### User Stories

- [EPIC LINK](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-7365) --> [User Story](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-8672)

## Proposal

> * **Controllability:** The proposal is to introduce a parameter called  <span style="color:red">*extraManifests.builtinCRs*</span>. which can hold value "*include|exclude*", which provide the flexibility for the customer to include/exclude CRs that is provided via ztp-container. 

Reviewer 4: Why do we need to list the files. Shouldn't it be a version directory which the site config consumes, if it overlaps with the default set, the new user defined CR takes precedence

Author: In the current version (4.13), 
- if it overlaps with the default set, precedence doesn't take place, and error is returned mentioning the filename must change. https://github.com/openshift-kni/cnf-features-deploy/blob/master/ztp/siteconfig-generator/siteConfig/siteConfigBuilder.go#L461-L465

Reviewer 4: My point is that is should, not sure why we complicate this with adding lists, up to the user to put into the directory the CR's they want to add/override

Reviewer 5: I like this idea.  If the user provides a duplicate filename, we should assume they intend to replace what was in the original.

To exclude a file, the user could create an empty file in their override directory with no contents, and we could take that as a signal to replace the objects in that file with nothing.

Reviewer 5: For example...

Built-in directory tree:
```
source-crs
 - A.yaml (has object a1 and a2)
 - B.yaml (has objects b1 and b2)
 - C.yaml (has objects c1 and c2)
```
User provides:
```
 - A.yaml (has objects a3 and a4)
 - C.yaml (is empty)
```

The end result should be:
```
- a3 and a4 (because the user's A.yaml replaced the built-in A.yaml)
- b1 and b2 (because the user didn't override B.yaml)
- That is all (do NOT include objects c1 or c2 because the user provided an empty C.yaml)
```

Author: Currently, user can't say, i only want to apply my custom CRS and nothing should come from the ztp-container. The only workaround of that issue is suppose you have (A,B,C,D,E).yaml in the extraManifestPath and want to include all of them, then:

```yaml
extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        exclude:
          - A.yaml
          - - A.yaml
          - - A.yaml
          - - A.yaml
```

Author: @lack  For the second case, if we support override and fallback as you have mentioned-

For the case of 2 different versions of extra-manifests, for example if a user have below directory structure 

```yaml
siteconfig/
├── kustomization.yaml
├── version_4.12
│   ├── kustomization.yaml
│   ├── sno-extra-manifest/
│   ├── cnfde9.yaml
└── version_4.13
    ├── kustomization.yaml
    ├── sno-extra-manifest/
    ├── cnfde10.yaml    
```

And the siteconfig points the extraManifestPath towards 4.12 folder 
```
 extraManifestPath: version_4.12/sno-extra-manifest
```
but ztp-container currently running is 4.13, falling back for one of the missing CR which may have changed from 4.12 to 4.13, will mismatch the version of the CR

Reviewer 4: Doesn't it need to point to 4.13 if running 4.13 container ?

Author: "To exclude a file, the user could create an empty file in their override directory with no contents, and we could take that as a signal to replace the objects in that file with nothing." - What if there are 10 CR files they would like to exclude for example, now do they have to create 10 different empty files? I don't think its user friendly.

I think the reasonable solution for the case:

- User wants to add all the Custom CRs, none from the ztp container:

 ```yaml
  - cluster:
     extraManifestPath: mypath/
     extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: exclude
  ```
  
  - User wants to add Custom CRS along with the CRs from the container, but same named CR would take precedence from the user directory:
  
```extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      builtinCRs: include	
```

Author: @browsell The idea is to decouple what the version we have in the container to what user wants to apply, if they have v4.10,v4.11,v4.12,v4.13 folders for example, and they have already extracted those CRs from the container and pushed to their git, then for deploying every version they will need to run same versioned ztp-container running each time in the hub

Reviewer 4: Sounds complicated, you are going to have to build backwards compatibility into each new container version including different per release default crs.

Reviewer 2: The goal of this work is to get to version independence (and not have to build in backwards compatibility to the tools/container). When we have the ability to exclude the built in content (this new `builtinCRs: exclude` field) the user can set their system up to only ever pull from git. This means they can have a set of 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, ... extra manifests in git and point to the correct set based on what they are deploying (one tool supporting multiple versions). 

Ideally we would set the default value of `builtinCRs` to "exclude" but that would break existing deployments in non-obvious ways. Existing customers, with no extra manifests in git would start deploying clusters with no extra manifests. Cluster would deploy just fine but would be seriously mis-configured. Perhaps we can flag the field for changing default in an upcoming release and communicate to customers the expectation that the extra manifests be kept in git alongside the SiteConfig starting with the current release?

Author: New commit 3dadf26972770907a83001b5feddd3236416f943 is added based on the design discussion happened in 06/09 (https://docs.google.com/document/d/1S4RVy6dRmOTuVtPngB8YM2bUp4CUED_370XZJKPgoPo/edit#). Please review @imiller0 @lack @serngawy @pixelsoccupied @browsell

The enhancement seeks to address the version independence of extra manifests, by putting version dependent manifests in version specific folder in git and pointing the directories via `extraManifestSearchPaths`.

## Motivation

* Currently customer can put custom manifests in the git repo and point them via **extraManifestPath**. 
* **Current behavior:** If customer only want to include custom CRs from git directory to build site specific CRs:
  * **inclusionDefault** must be set to *exclude* which will exclude all the CRs from ztp-container
  * pass the list of CR file names under **filter.include**, that will include listed CRs. But it limits:

    * does not allow to have the [same CR name](https://github.com/openshift-kni/cnf-features-deploy/blob/master/ztp/siteconfig-generator/siteConfig/siteConfigBuilder.go#L462-L464) for the custom CRs. 

    * to be able to add custom CRs, customer needs to change the name of the custom CR.

>     * as a result same named CR coming from user directory doesn't take precedent, rather siteconfig issues an error complaining same named CR is not allowed.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to weave into the current behavior that the user is not able to capture the full set of version-specific extra manifests in git along with the SiteConfig because they cannot override the default set because of the inability to have the same named file.

Author: updated with commit https://github.com/openshift-kni/kni-enhancements/commit/dd384000bc29451c11ff6c6749e70cc07a1005d1

  ```yaml
  - cluster:
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - myCR.yaml					

>   ```

Reviewer 2: This example no longer seems to be connected to anything.

Author: Yes, this is the current behavior. I wanted to highlight what is in there currently.

Reviewer 2: Maybe give it a bit of context or framing as the current configurability?

Author: updated with commit https://github.com/openshift-kni/kni-enhancements/commit/dd384000bc29451c11ff6c6749e70cc07a1005d1

### Goals

> * Allow customer to include any custom CRs having same/different name than builtIn CRs residing in the ztp-container

Reviewer 2: Lead with the primary goal: Customer can place the full set of version specific day-0 manifests (extra manifests) into git alongside the SiteConfig. This allows the user to deploy the correct version of manifests based on the version of OCP being deployed.

All the rest of these goals are important aspects to reaching this primary goal.

Author: updated with commit https://github.com/openshift-kni/kni-enhancements/commit/dd384000bc29451c11ff6c6749e70cc07a1005d1

* Allow customer to include multiple directory path to look for extra-manifests in siteconfig, this way we are better prepared for 4.15+ features

* This will enable the customer to control what CRs get added in site generation

* Keep backward compatibility of the behavior corresponds to 4.13 version, meaning the new parameter is not mandatory to generate CRs through siteconfig.

### Non-Goals

> - TBD

Reviewer 2: Refactoring of the extra manifest filtering feature.

Author: updated with commit https://github.com/openshift-kni/kni-enhancements/commit/dd384000bc29451c11ff6c6749e70cc07a1005d1

### User Stories

- [EPIC LINK](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-7365) --> [User Story](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-8672)

## Proposal

* The proposal is to use a new field as the opt-in, eg. `extraManifestSearchPaths` which can include multiple directories

  ```bash
  extraManifestSearchPaths:
    - myPath1/
    - myPath2/
  ```

>   * when `extraManifestSearchPaths` is defined in Siteconfig, it will exclude any builtin CRs from ztp-container

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * when `extraManifestSearchPaths` is defined in Siteconfig, the generated installation CRs will not include any builtin "extra manifest" CRs from the ztp-container.
```

>   * Going forward, we will deprecate `extraManifestPath`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * We will deprecate `extraManifestPath` starting in this release. If defined it will continue to function exactly as it does today, but customers will be recommended to use the new extraManifestSearchPaths field.
```

Author: done

>   * Support multiple entries in the list in 4.14 – for example, extra-manifests from ztp-container in one directory, customers custom CR content in another directory

Reviewer 2: It is a bit confusing to say above that we don't use the version in the container and then use it here. Suggested reword:
```suggestion
  * Support multiple entries in the list in 4.14 – for example, recommended version specific extra-manifests in one directory and customer's custom extra manifests in another directory
```

Author: done

  * Multiple entries accumulate. All files from entry1 and all files from entry2 will be applied during site generation.

* How does templating work with the git based flows?

  * SiteGen will look for `.tmpl` files in specific directories as it currently does inside the ztp-container 

> * Should we keep filtering? 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* How does this affect the existing extra manifest filtering feature? 
```

Author: done

  * We keep filtering and support as it is.
  * The `extraManifestSearchPaths` collects up all the content and then passes to the filtering subsystem as it is today.

* Do we support override of named files using the `extraManifestSearchPaths`?

  * Yes. There are multiple directories in the list. Each entry adds more content to the set. If there are overlapping names, we will overwrite the previous filename.

* Do we allow override of same named files in the old `extraManifestPath` field? 

  * No, we do not. The old behavior does not change when customer define old `extraManifestPath` path and not the new field `extraManifestSearchPaths`.

* What if customer include both `extraManifestPath` and `extraManifestSearchPaths` in the siteconfig?

  * The behavior of `extraManifestSearchPaths` will take precedence. We will neither generate any CR from `extraManifestPath` nor the builtin CRs from the ztp-container

### How does the proposal help

* **Controllability:** The proposal provides the flexibility for the customer to include/exclude any CRs from multiple directories from user Git repository. 

>   * customer can put extra-manifests retrieved from ztp-container at `myPath` and their own custom CRs in `myPath2` as shown below as an example 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * customer can put extra-manifests extracted from ztp-container at `myPath` and their own custom CRs in `myPath2` as shown below as an example 
```

    ```yaml
      - cluster:
        extraManifestSearchPaths:  <------ new field
          - myPath/
          - myPath2/
        extraManifests:
          filter:			
      ```

>   * Any same named CR file in `myPath2` will override from `myPath`. Until 4.13 release, customer couldn't put same named CR in the extraManifestPath. Now overriding is possible but they have to opt in for `extraManifestSearchPaths`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Any same named CR file in `myPath2` will override from `myPath`. Prior to this change, the customer couldn't put same named CR in the extraManifestPath. Now overriding is possible but they have to opt in for `extraManifestSearchPaths`. 
```

```yaml
siteconfig/
├── kustomization.yaml
├── version_4.12
│   ├── kustomization.yaml
│   ├── sno-extra-manifest/
|   ├── custom-manifests/
│   ├── cnfde9.yaml
└── version_4.13
    ├── kustomization.yaml
    ├── sno-extra-manifest/
    ├── custom-manifests/
    ├── cnfde10.yaml    
```

### Workflow Description

Variable scenarios are briefly explained in the below table based on the proposal and the output list of CRs:

* Assumption: customers siteconfig consists 2 extra manifests paths which are in the user Git repository

  ```yaml
    - cluster:
      extraManifestSearchPaths: 
        - sno-extra-manifest/
        - custom-manifests/
      extraManifests:
        filter:			
    ```

  
* Those path conatins below files:

  ```bash
  extra manifests in the sno-extra-manifest

  - A.yaml
  - B.yaml
  - C.yaml 
  ```

  ```bash
  extra manifests in the custom-manifests

  - C.yaml
  - D.yaml
  - E.yaml 
  ```

<table>
<tr>
<th>
Scenario
</th>
<th>
Logical Flow
</th>
<th>
Output CR list
</th>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
Include all files from the path
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestSearchPaths: 
      - sno-extra-manifest/

>       - custom-manifests/					

Reviewer 2: Trailing whitespace is making the table wider than needed
```suggestion
      - custom-manifests/
```

  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
  <li>When <b>extraManifestSearchPaths</b> is defined all the CRs will be added in site generation</li>
 <li>In this example, all the CRs from user git will be added</li>
</td>

<td>
  [A.yaml B.yaml C.yaml D.yaml E.yaml] <-- C.yaml picked from <b>custom-manifests</b>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
Siteconfig contains both parameter
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestSearchPaths: 
      - sno-extra-manifest/
      - custom-manifests/

>     extraManifestPath: custom-manifests/						

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    extraManifestPath: custom-manifests/
```

  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
  <li>Proposed 4.14 behavior will be applied. SiteGen will discard extraManifestPath, it will only add files from <b>extraManifestSearchPaths</b></li>

</td>

<td>
 [A.yaml B.yaml C.yaml D.yaml E.yaml] <-- C.yaml picked from <b>custom-manifests</b> path
</td>

</tr>
<td>
Exclude some files
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestSearchPaths: 
      - sno-extra-manifest/
      - custom-manifests/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - C.yaml

>           - D.yaml					

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          - D.yaml
```

 ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
  <li>The behavior of filter will not change</li>
  <li>if the default is <i>exclude</i>, only listed *.yaml files will be included in CR generation</li>
</td>

<td>
 [C.yaml D.yaml] <--C.yaml picked  <b>custom-manifests</b>
</td>

</tr>

<tr>
<td>
Include only mentioned files
<pre>
 yaml
  [
    extraManifestSearchPaths: 
      - sno-extra-manifest/
      - custom-manifests/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: include
        exclude:
          - C.yaml

>           - D.yaml					

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          - D.yaml
```

 ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
  <li>The behavior of filter will not change</li>
  <li>if the default is <i>include</i>, only listed *.yaml files will be excluded in CR generation</li>
</td>

<td>
 [A.yaml B.yaml E.yaml]
</td>

</table>
         

### Risks and Mitigations

N/A

## Implementation choices

N/A

### API Extensions

New parameter will be introduced named `extraManifestSearchPaths` which will accept a `list[]`

### Test Cases

* Add tests on the `extraManifestSearchPaths` behavior:
 
  * Single and multiple path can be passed
  * Generating correct list of CRs from correct files
  * File name override works as proposed

> 

Reviewer 2: Another test case:
* Builtin CRs are not applied to cluster if extraManifestSearchPaths is defined in SiteConfig

    * does not allow to have the [same CR name](https://github.com/openshift-kni/cnf-features-deploy/blob/master/ztp/siteconfig-generator/siteConfig/siteConfigBuilder.go#L462-L464) for the custom CRs. 

    * to be able to add custom CRs, customer needs to change the name of the custom CR.

    * as a result same named CR coming from user directory doesn't take precedent, rather siteconfig issues an error complaining same named CR is not allowed.

  * below is an example of how to include a CR called `myCR.yaml` from `extraManifestPath`  

  ```yaml
  - cluster:
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - myCR.yaml					
  ```

### Goals

* Customer can place the full set of version specific day-0 manifests (extra manifests) into git alongside the SiteConfig. This allows the user to deploy the correct version of manifests based on the version of OCP being deployed.

* Allow customer to include multiple directory path to look for extra-manifests in siteconfig, this way we are better prepared for 4.15+ features

* This will enable the customer to control what CRs get added in site generation

> * Keep backward compatibility of the behavior corresponds to 4.13 version, meaning the new parameter is not mandatory to generate CRs through siteconfig.

Reviewer 4: For all time or for a migration period ?

Author: We would like to keep the behavior of 4.13 in 4.14, with adding the extra var `extraManifestSearchPaths`, if that opted by user, builtIn CRs are disabled.

So in short, we support 4.13 behavior for migration period and will deprecate from 4.15 release.

* What if customer include both `extraManifestPath` and `extraManifestSearchPaths` in the siteconfig?

  * The behavior of `extraManifestSearchPaths` will take precedence. We will neither generate any CR from `extraManifestPath` nor the builtin CRs from the ztp-container

### How does the proposal help

* **Controllability:** The proposal provides the flexibility for the customer to include/exclude any CRs from multiple directories from user Git repository. 

  * customer can put extra-manifests extracted from ztp-container at `myPath` and their own custom CRs in `myPath2` as shown below as an example 

    ```yaml
      - cluster:
        extraManifestSearchPaths:  <------ new field
          - myPath/
          - myPath2/
        extraManifests:
          filter:			
      ```

  * Any same named CR file in `myPath2` will override from `myPath`. Prior to this change, the customer couldn't put same named CR in the extraManifestPath. Now overriding is possible but they have to opt in for `extraManifestSearchPaths`. 

* **Version Independence**: 
  * What is version independence in this context?
    

>     * The ability to exclude the built in content and the user can set their system up to only ever pull from git. This means they can have a set of 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, ... extra manifests in git and point to the correct set based on what they are deploying (one tool supporting multiple versions).

Reviewer 4: Why wouldn't we then deprecate the builtins and require that all CRs be stored in git vs this hybrid model ?

Author: We plan to deprecate builtins from 4.15 release, so for this release customer can have hybrid behavior. But, in the doc, we will recommend to put all the CRs in the git point them using `extraManifestSearchPaths`, but if they don't and choose to do the old way, sitegen will still be able to generate CRs.

    * The decoupling of extra-manifests from ztp-container: current ztp-container only contain a single version of extra-manifests. Using the git approach, user doesn't need to launch different versioned ztp-container to deploy different versioned manifests, rather just point towards the correct git repo path.

  This change will allow customer to have version independence of extra-manifests having different versioned folder in their git repository, as an example:

```yaml
siteconfig/

> ├── kustomization.yaml

Reviewer: So based on v2 can you update to show dir structure with say `version_4.12` (e.g used but cluster1 and cluster2) and `myPath` (used by cluster2)

├── version_4.12
│   ├── kustomization.yaml
│   ├── sno-extra-manifest/
|   ├── custom-manifests/
│   ├── cnfde9.yaml
└── version_4.13
    ├── kustomization.yaml
    ├── sno-extra-manifest/
    ├── custom-manifests/
    ├── cnfde10.yaml    
```

### Workflow Description

Variable scenarios are briefly explained in the below table based on the proposal and the output list of CRs:

* Assumption: customers siteconfig consists 2 extra manifests paths which are in the user Git repository

  ```yaml
    - cluster:
      extraManifestSearchPaths: 
        - sno-extra-manifest/
        - custom-manifests/

>       extraManifests:

Reviewer: Can we do `.extraManifests.searchPaths` instead? Basically reading seachPath, filter etc are ops related to extraManifests ([see](https://github.com/openshift-kni/cnf-features-deploy/blob/master/ztp/siteconfig-generator/siteConfig/siteConfig.go#L157-L160))

Author: Currently `extraManifestPath` (https://github.com/openshift-kni/cnf-features-deploy/blob/master/ztp/siteconfig-generator/siteConfig/siteConfig.go#L181) is outside of `extraManifests`

        filter:			
    ```

  
* Those path conatins below files:

  ```bash
  extra manifests in the sno-extra-manifest

  - A.yaml
  - B.yaml
  - C.yaml 
  ```

  ```bash
  extra manifests in the custom-manifests

  - C.yaml
  - D.yaml
  - E.yaml 
  ```

<table>
<tr>
<th>
Scenario
</th>
<th>
Logical Flow
</th>
<th>
Output CR list
</th>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
Include all files from the path
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestSearchPaths: 
      - sno-extra-manifest/
      - custom-manifests/			
  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
  <li>When <b>extraManifestSearchPaths</b> is defined all the CRs will be added in site generation</li>
 <li>In this example, all the CRs from user git will be added</li>
</td>

<td>
  [A.yaml B.yaml C.yaml D.yaml E.yaml] <-- C.yaml picked from <b>custom-manifests</b>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
Siteconfig contains both parameter
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestSearchPaths: 
      - sno-extra-manifest/
      - custom-manifests/
    extraManifestPath: custom-manifests/
  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>

>   <li>Proposed 4.14 behavior will be applied. SiteGen will discard extraManifestPath, it will only add files from <b>extraManifestSearchPaths</b></li>

Reviewer: So are eventually going to get rid of `.extraManifestPath`?

</td>

</tr>
<td>
Exclude some files
<pre>
 yaml
 [
    extraManifestSearchPaths: 
      - sno-extra-manifest/
      - custom-manifests/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - C.yaml
          - D.yaml
  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
  <li>The behavior of filter will not change</li>
  <li>if the default is <i>exclude</i>, only listed *.yaml files will be included in CR generation</li>
</td>

<td>
 [C.yaml D.yaml] <--C.yaml picked  <b>custom-manifests</b>
</td>

</tr>

<tr>
<td>
Include only mentioned files
<pre>
 yaml
  [
    extraManifestSearchPaths: 
      - sno-extra-manifest/
      - custom-manifests/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: include
        exclude:
          - C.yaml
          - D.yaml
  ]
</pre>
</td>

<td>
  <li>The behavior of filter will not change</li>
  <li>if the default is <i>include</i>, only listed *.yaml files will be excluded in CR generation</li>
</td>

<td>
 [A.yaml B.yaml E.yaml]
</td>

</table>
         

### Risks and Mitigations

N/A

## Implementation choices

N/A

### API Extensions

> New parameter will be introduced named `extraManifestSearchPaths` which will accept a `list[]`

Reviewer: So if the list's length is greater than 0...it's implied that the user wants version independence?

Author: Not necessarily. For example:

```
extraManifestSearchPaths:
      - testManifest/extra-manifest
      - customManifests
```      

user can put builtin CRs coming from the release specific ztp-container in path `testManifest/extra-manifest` and their custom CRs in `customManifests`, and if one/multiple CRs found in both path, the later will get precedence.

---
title: Allowing version independence in siteconfig
authors:
  - "@sabbir-47"
reviewers:
  - "@imiller0"
  - "@serngawy"
  - "@Iack"
  - "@serngawy" 
approvers:
  - "@imiller0"

api-approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2023-06-06
last-updated: 2023-06-09
status: provisional
---

> # Cluster Group Upgrade (CGU) conditions and their reason/messages enhancement

Reviewer: probably not Cgu work?

Author: Good catch :)

* Allow customer to include multiple directory path to look for extra-manifests in siteconfig, this way we are better prepared for 4.15+ features

* This will enable the customer to control what CRs get added in site generation

* Keep backward compatibility of the behavior corresponds to 4.13 version, meaning the new parameter is not mandatory to generate CRs through siteconfig.

### Non-Goals

* Refactoring of the extra manifest filtering feature.
### User Stories

- [EPIC LINK](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-7365) --> [User Story](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNF-8672)

## Proposal

* The proposal is to use a new field as the opt-in, eg. `extraManifests.searchPaths` which can include multiple directories

  ```bash
  extraManifests:
    searchPaths:
      - myPath1/
      - myPath2/
  ```

  * when `extraManifests.searchPaths` is defined in Siteconfig, the generated installation CRs will not include any builtin "extra manifest" CRs from the ztp-container.

>   * we will deprecate `extraManifestPath` in the next release. If defined it will continue to function exactly as it does today, but customers will be recommended to use the new extraManifests.searchPaths field.

Reviewer: Maybe not next release but something we need need plan out properly (e.g where would the depreciation notice go)

Reviewer 2: @sabbir-47 can you add that to the agenda so it does not get lost. Thanks!

  * support multiple entries in the list in 4.14 – for example, recommended version specific extra-manifests in one directory and customer's custom extra manifests in another directory

>   * multiple entries accumulate. All files from entry1 and all files from entry2 will be applied during site generation.

Reviewer: Properly should mention..if `fileA` exists in both entry1 and entry2...`entry2/fileA` provided that entry2 appear entryA? This is a change from pervious behaviour where fileA couldnt be included in extra-manifest folder if it existed in container? 

Or does this behaviour apply only when using this new feature?

Author: This behavior only applies when searchPaths is declared, later directory always get precedence. There is no change of behavior when searchPaths is not declared, meaning only applicable to new feature, i will reword that.

Author: Updated with commit ee93abc4c36ebfda332706059d8ba4c680dde7c1

## Motivation

* **Currently** customer can put custom manifests in the git repo and point them via **extraManifestPath**. 
* **Current behavior:** If customer only want to include custom CRs from git directory to build site specific CRs:
  * **inclusionDefault** must be set to *exclude* which will exclude all the CRs from ztp-container
  * pass the list of CR file names under **filter.include**, that will include listed CRs. But it limits:

    * does not allow to have the [same CR name](https://github.com/openshift-kni/cnf-features-deploy/blob/master/ztp/siteconfig-generator/siteConfig/siteConfigBuilder.go#L462-L464) for the custom CRs. 

    * to be able to add custom CRs, customer needs to change the name of the custom CR.

    * as a result same named CR coming from user directory doesn't take precedent, rather siteconfig issues an error complaining same named CR is not allowed.

  ```yaml
  - cluster:
    extraManifestPath: mypath/
    extraManifests:
      filter:
        inclusionDefault: exclude
        include:
          - myCR.yaml					
  ```

### Goals

> * Allow customer to include any custom CRs having same/different name than builtIn CRs residing in the container

Author: updated with commit dd384000bc29451c11ff6c6749e70cc07a1005d1

> * Same named CR take precedence over ztp-container's CR 

Author: updated with commit https://github.com/openshift-kni/kni-enhancements/commit/dd384000bc29451c11ff6c6749e70cc07a1005d1
